---
layout: post
title: Fundamentals of Object Oriented Programming
---

Object Oriented programming is a type of programming in which you model your program/code around data sturctures called 
objects.Objects are usually implementation or instances of classes and they therefore they have properties and methods.
Properties are the attributes of a class while methods are the behaviour ie the functionality part .I am going to briefly 
talk about the four fundaments of object oriented programming which is inheritance, encapsuation, abstraction 
and polymorphism

### Encapsulation
Encapsuation simply means data hiding.i.e. preventing access to data by any means other than those specified. 
Encapsulation defines the access levels for elements of that class. These access levels define the access rights to the data, allowing us to access the data by a method of that particular class itself, from an inheritance class, or even from any other class. There are three levels of access:

public: functions of all classes may access the data or methods of a class that is defined with the public access level. This is the lowest level of data protection

protected: data access is restricted to functions of inheritance classes, i.e. member functions of that class and all sub-classes

private: data access is restricted to methods of that particular class only. This is the highest level of data protection

### Inheritance 
Inheritance is the mechanism by which an object acquires the some/all properties of another object.
For example: Car is a classification of Four Wheeler. Here Car acquires the properties of a four-wheeler. Other classifications could be a jeep, tempo, van etc. Four Wheeler defines a class of vehicles that have four wheels, and specific range of engine power, load carrying capacity etc. Car (termed as a sub-class) acquires these properties from Four Wheeler (termed as a super-class), and has some specific properties, which are different from other classifications of Four Wheeler, such as luxury, comfort, shape, size, usage etc.

A car can have further classification such as an open car, small car, big car etc, which will acquire the properties from both Four Wheeler and Car, but will still have some specific properties. This way the level of hierarchy can be extended to any level.

###Polymorphism
Polymorphism means to process objects differently based on their data type.
In other words it means, one method with multiple implementation, for a certain class of action. And which implementation to be used is decided at runtime depending upon the situation (i.e., data type of the object)
Polymorphism could be static and dynamic both. Overloading is static polymorphism while, overriding is dynamic polymorphism.

Overloading in simple words means two methods having same method name but takes different input parameters. This called static because, which method to be invoked will be decided at the time of compilation
Overriding means a derived class is implementing a method of its super class.
